like let me throw up two more books just
so I want to get into the next category
but I realized that I didn't put up the
last two
uhhuh the experiences are wonderful the
experience is extraordinary but how do
we know these people aren't just
imagining and how do we know that they
aren't really just kind of it's a
beautiful story but how do we know it's
really a story and U Pim V uh he's a
Norwegian like doctor and this book is
there have been a number of books of
this type but I think this book is the
very best scientific evaluation of the
near episode phenomena he just he really
puts it through all the paces he looks
at it through different angles he looks
at the cases he looks at the arguments
against their legitimacy and he just
patiently sifts it out and so if you
want to look at a book or you have that
if you have a husband at home that's
just an engineer he's hypercritical of
thinking that this is just not real this
is the book you want to look at this
because this is the best best critical
analysis of
phenomal and lastly I would mention this
the fourth proof of heaven even
Alexander and some of you have met him
and know of his work and he's kind of
the man of the hour on some of this work
and we have this in the bookstore where
he has his work from the bookstore and
um I think even is uh doing great work
really out there he's pitching hard he's
he's absorbing a lot of abuse from the
academic Community but you know his
experience really um powerful and uh
really he's he's doing good work and I I
think this is a beautiful
experience okay so let's go to the next
category life between life
the now this work actually began with
this book published in
1988 by Joel Whitten and Joe fiser Joel
Whitten is a Canadian
psychiatrist who was doing past lives
therapy on behalf of the Canadian
government by the way he was interested
in forign this and he accidentally gave
an ambiguous direction to one of his
clients and suddenly he found that his
client was not remembering a past life
he was remembering a life between past
lives he didn't even think that this was
possible
but he discovered and he began to
regress people back you went when you
went back into a former life and then
you went through the death in that life
he found that he could escort people
into the place they went to after they
died and when he had done this many
times he published this short book with
Joe Fischer who was a newspaper reporter
life between life and this is really the
beginning of this research but man I'd
like to show show you primarily around
this work is this guy uh Michael
Newton Michael
Newton and all three of these books are
Michael
Newton and we have two of them right am
we have two of them in the
bookstore these are wonderful books I
mean these are just wonderful books
Michael Newton likewise uh was doing
research doing past lives therapy he was
taking people back to heal their
circumstances and their present Life by
taking them back to their former lives
and you know uncover the trauma and so
on so forth and then the same thing
happened to him he gave an ambiguous
instruction and he discovered that
people had the capacity to go back into
their life before they were born the
life between life what happens between
death and birth and he began to
incorporate this into his therapy and
after he had taken 600 people right so
just imagine if you're a therapist how
long does it take you to have 600
clients going back into this phenomenon
and he kept detailed records he wrote
this first book Journeys of s journeys
of uh journey of the soul in which he
basically summarizes always staying
close to his is the what people
experience in the structure of
postmortem State and then that was
followed was the it's in your
biblography I gave
you 2000 the next one destiny of Souls
and these two are really kind of like
two halves of the same book I mean
they're really U Destiny of souls gives
you more detail but the phenomenon is
the same he's just going into it in
Greater
detail and uh because and then memories
of the afterlife what happened is
Michael Newton was seeing so many
patients psych psychotherapist began to
come to him and he began to train the
therapist he began so he stopped working
with patients so much as he began to
work with therapists and he created an
Institute and so now he he now this is
the fastest growing area in hypnotherapy
and past lives therapy and the people
who are being trained not only to do
past life regressions but to do life
between life therapy because it it
deepens and accelerates the therapeutic
process so that all of this last book
are collections of cases by a different
therapist so they will get the therapist
describe their background how they got
into this then they present one case
then they move on to the next therapist
so you see that the third book in fact
was published by the Newton Institute so
the first two books are Michael newt
newon the third book comes from the
Newton
Institute
now there are so many wonderful things
uh to share with you from this material
like the near-death episode
research um it just is so consoling and
it is so
uh illuminated to to have a clear
description of the death experience as
the return to
ecstasy here we go into the next step
into the nuts and bolts of the world we
return to when we
die uh so let me just kind of share some
observations that come that you'll find
in these first in these books of n he
says uh and first of all everything that
we talked about with near-death episode
research all of that phenomena is
replicated in life between life therapy
the same phenomenon of taking the tunnel
the encounter with the light layers and
layers of light he talks about levels
that his clients talks about levels of
light all woven together in stratified
threads a series of rising Dimensions
above the physical or tangible World
they become less dense as one moves
farther away from the heavy influences
of Earth he talks about there's a period
of orientation that when people would
die in this past by therapy they would
go into some type of very uh comfortable
consoling environment a park a lake
something very U familiar and they would
Orient and then once they were activated
to this new condition then they would go
beyond that into deeper into the death
process so this
and there is there is a technology there
a and there is a whole cadra of beans
whose job it is to help catch people
when they die to help them reorient to
the true nature of
infinity just say something it just
brought to mind there's a movie there's
a movie in PM you probably know exactly
in Margaret um it's life Defending Your
Life
Street like this is exactly Sim exactly
maybe okay very similar this is what
just that movie is what would happen if
IBM could get the BAU
contract they go to this place that
looks like Dallas and you can eat as
much as you want yeah you know and
you're Defending Your Life your kind of
life is reviewed and whether you go on
or next it's something like that it I
mean how many people die every day in
the
world hundreds of thousands of people
die die every day well that's a lot of
people to catch and integrate and it
doesn't happen like some big machine it
takes Personnel it takes be to catch
several hundred thousand people every
day do they have a health and retirement
plan retirement plan is pretty
good he says uh
that there is a whole uh I don't want
to there many first of all where we go
when we die there are many many many
layers where we go when we die there are
many layers of the spiritual universe
and not everybody goes to the same place
everybody goes to the same home but not
every there like it's a condo many
layers and you don't all go to the same
layer of the condo um he says there are
many guides many beings and even the
guides have guides and the basic
principle is the more experienced coach
the less experienced and this happens up
and down the system that there are that
you find that you had to have guides and
those guides have supervisors and those
supervisors you know they have guides
and there is a hierarchy of guides and
what is it that
determines one's placement in that
hierarchy is really simply their
spiritual maturation it's open-ended
it's a spiritual maturation
process he says that uh ghost as
Hollywood presents actually they're very
rare it's very rare for people who get
hung up you can get hung up in the
exiting process but uh what Hollywood
has inculcated as all these kind of
Shadow phenomenon and scary things
things that happen when we die it's just
it's an insignificant
percentage of the number of people who
are dying the large majority of people
go through those intermediate
territories without
problem now we're all worried are we in
that
small yeah well he actually I'll give
you some percentages in a minute because
he he's he gives you some he has some
statistics he's worked out on stages of
Soul development but a couple of other
things first first of all reincarnation
is just an obvious fact of life as soon
if you're out of your body you know that
reincarnation is just true no wh Sands
or butts that's it I'm sorry but that's
the way it is period secondly uh there's
no
hell concept of H is just a distorted
you know incomplete perception everybody
goes
home now that doesn't mean I mean if you
were a if you were a mean son of a
and you hurt people and you cause people
pain and
suffering you got to deal you know
you're going to have to deal with that
and there is processes and beings who
are there to help you deal with that and
there are people there are people who
can be so damaged by their Earth
experience they become so hateful and so
filled with so much malice that very
special circumstances are required to
bring them back into the wholeness of
spirit right and he discusses those
particularly in the second book Destiny
of souls he discusses this in great
detail there are beings whose specialty
is working with highly damaged Souls
damaged beings who can hurt so
traumatically
um he says there are soul clusters that
we are not in this alone we actually
it's like going to college everybody you
m you matriculate in a group and this
group stays intact through the entire
Journey
process now he says that after he calls
them Soul clusters he says there are
five to 20 beings in Soul in your soul
cluster the average he finds is about
15 so there are 15 beings who at the at
every Incarnation they come back
together they don't necessarily
incarnate together sometimes but when
you're in between life you come back
together and you are immediately transp
parent I mean one of the things that
happens in the spirit world is you can't
hide
anything everybody knows everything
about you and you know everything about
the beings that you are with and and
your debriefing of your most recent life
experience is done in the context of
your soul cluster and each of the
members of your soul cluster may have
guides and sometimes they different
guides and sometimes they're the same
guides but that there is there is a
social Matrix within which which this is
all taking
place younger Souls tend to stay more
tightly clustered with their soul
cluster older Souls tend to kind of go
off and do things more individually but
they always come back they're always
part of the Soul cluster and the Soul
cluster basically goes through the
experience together but not necessarily
at the same Pace some members of a soul
cluster May proceed very slowly and
other members of the Soul cluster May
proceed faster how do you know who's
going faster he says well all you have
to do is look at the color of the light
he says as you become more mature your
the energy of your being the which is
light changes color and he has kind of a
model of a sort a rainbow spectrum of
the stages of development reflected in
the colors and he says it's immediately
obvious where person is in their
development just by looking at their
color
okay he says he he says he talks about
stages of development he does his
statistics he keeps track of things and
he differentiates five stages of sold
development that he's been able to
identify so the question is what's the
percentage in those five stages here's
his statistics level one 40
2% level two
31% level you know that's kind of
discouraging isn't it that means 73% of
all the souls that he's worked with are
at levels 1 and
two that's 3/4 of the world's population
in levels 1 and two level three 177%
level 4 9% level 5
1% here's a couple of he says quote I
have had many cases where a client has
been incarnating for up to 30,000 years
on Earth and is still in the lower
levels of one and
two on the other hand he said I once had
a client who entered into a level three
state of awareness after only 4,000
years an outstanding
performance so you mean percentages
again okay percentage level
one
42 2
31 3
17 4 9 5
1% now I'll just mention
something one of the things I really
like about Newton is he stays with his
data he is true to his data he gives you
cases for everything he saids he gives
you examples that come from his
cases that's I love the empirical side
you know the disciplined side of his
work in that
respect but that's also from my
perspective is also the limitation of
the work because he can only reflect the
statistics of the people who come to him
to work and as he himself says it tends
to be kind of younger Souls who take
find their way to him I mean the Dal
Lama has never gone to work with Michael
Newton great Saints and great beings
don't tend to need working with
therapists to explore these Dimensions
so that his figures tend to be skewed
somewhat I think in the lower direction
also his description of the nature of
postmortem existence is skewed to what
in the Tibetan vocabulary you would say
is the lower half of The Bard he tends
to give a more from my perspective a
more detailed and accurate description
only of the lower half of Heaven not of
the higher dimensions of Heaven that's
okay cuz that's where most of you are
going
right yeah I mean it's good and believe
me there's plenty of joy to go around it
really is but it's not I don't find it
to
be reflective of the totality it's
reflective of half of a
totality all
right uh
in my father's house are many mansions
so we're in the house we're just in
different Mansions we in different yeah
aspects yeah you know in the Tibetan
Book of the Dead in Buddhism they talk
about six levels to the six U uh Locus
the six Realms of existence hell beings
Hungry Ghost beings animals uh kind of
marked by ignorance human beings low low
Heavenly beings High heavenly things
each of these are subdivided the eight
hot Hells the eight cold Hells the eight
intermediate Hells there are 26 High
Heavenly realm so like hundreds and
hundreds of Realms divided and at one
level this is a teaching about what Happ
where we go when we die from another
level it's a teaching about what's
happening right here because in this
city there are hell Realms you know
there are some beings who are living in
the hell of violence and anger there are
some beings who are living in in the
realm of greed insatiable appetites
there are some beings who are living in
the the high Heavenly realm that
everything there Silver's blue in their
mouth everything is fine they've always
had plenty they always you know so it's
BTO reality the intermediate state but
it's also in the physical world we're in
this condition right
now those who have more experience help
those who have less experience guides
help Souls Souls help each other high
guides help lower guides he
differentiates he has his own vocabulary
he talks about Watchers they're Junior
and senior Watchers he talks about sages
he talks about the old ones who are
Beyond level six you know that just
there are the the old ones and the old
ones are kind
of you know he talks about a Council of
Elders when you die and when you Orient
and and when you debrief with your
spirit guide somewhere in there you're
going to be brought before the Council
of Elders and the elders are these old
ones and before you
incarnate when you've chosen your life
when you've done a number of things you
go before the Council of Elders so this
is like we're all in this together it's
a collective that's why I talked about
the community of Heaven that there is a
social Matrix there's a world in which
there is a social social structure and
it's a social structure which is not
hierarchical in the sense of the old
ones are more valuable than the younger
ones there's not a value there's not a
value hierarchy because we're all Divine
we're all of the Divine that's the
fundamental truth but there is a a
gradient of expertise there's a gradient
of development and that's just accepted
as an obvious truth so on the one hand
everybody is equally
valuable and older Learners help the
younger Learners to grow you know
there's a structure to it there's a
logic to
it and it's he talks about some of the U
the different worlds of that reality he
talks about uh the world of altered time
is one of his languages for it he talks
about the world of creation and non-c
creation and the world of all all
knowing let me translate those phrases
the world of alter time is like a Hol de
you've seen Star Trek you they go to the
hollow deck and when you go on the
hollow deck you can have any experience
you want to he says you can do that when
you die too and there you know when you
what are you doing with all your time in
between from birth from Death to birth
he said well you you can go into this
place called the world of alter time
where you can go into this Hol and you
can experience creating reality you can
just create anything that you can
imagine it's a hollow
deck he says there is a world of
creation and non-c creation I call it
Earth
to there is an actual physical world
where you can go and you can experiment
with your creative abilities but it
actually is a tangible world and you can
have you can spend as much time there as
you want where you're flexing your new
muscles and and you're you're
experimenting with doing things he talks
about what are you what are you doing he
saids well one person reported that they
were learning how to make
fish many that's that's a real that's
not a very no aspiration they're
literally using their mind to create
physical
form and the idea is that you know where
did all these new forms that show up in
ution you know our current thinking is
life creates things randomly and then
they're screened by survival of the
fittest but from Newton's perspective
that's not really quite the whole story
there is a creativity inherent in the
Universal process and you can practice
that creativity and there are beings who
practice the creation of new life forms
and eventually some of that practice
manifest in the manifestation of new
life forms on Earth which I like to
think about when I'm looking at those
coral reefs with all those beautiful
fish and thinking how is this all coming
about by
accident it gives me uh something to
hang on that hook where Jesus said ye
are
Gods we are creative beings and whatever
else he may have meant by that uh but
this is in that chapter for me that ye
are God's Place yeah that we're creative
beings we're creative beings and we we
you have to practice creativity you have
to learn to control the powers that are
yours by your virtue of your nature that
you can practice it and get better and
better at it it's like learning how to
play chess everybody's got the capacity
to be a master but you have to practice
that practice
Crea he also talks about this
world uh the world without
ego uh this is the spiritual eternity
War I I mentioned this to you before
this is a place where new Souls begin
and even it's one of the most beautiful
sections of I think it's Destiny of
souls where he talks about these beings
who are kind of like maternity W nurses
who catch the
new Souls they don't have a
self-identity yet they're ra it's like a
a solar flare coming off of the Sun and
they catch and hold them and and cater
for them and basically help them awaken
to individual existence world without
ego meaning world without sense of self
by the time they leave the Maternity
Ward they have a sense of individuality
they have a sense of self it's a very
and not all beings not all pieces of
energy make that transition it's like
some of them don't congeal into an
individuality in which case they are
kind of reabsorbed into the
totality and uh they catch more so it
it's not like there's an assembly
line and he says what here one person
said I didn't know myself asked myself
until I was moved into this quiet
place so a New Soul is not capable of
choice they don't have he says they're
not self
shaped once you have a self once you
have a sense of individuality he says it
it's your signature and you'll have that
signature
forever he says quote once given EO
becomes a covenant between oneself and
the givers to do the best I can with who
I
am who I am
changes what I am doesn't change the
Essence doesn't change but who I am the
form changes but the Covenant with the
Divine is to do the best you can with
who you are as the the Covenant of
individuated existence I as I mentioned
before in my dialogue with Iran llo my
experience is that individuality is the
one of the precious Gifts of existence
in fact I think it's probably the
greatest gift given by the great mother
so for me
only part of the Divine manifests as the
physical Universe part of the Divine is
outside the physical Universe the
physical universe is the only thing that
is hard enough that it has the strength
to break up the wholeness of the Divine
into individual parts so it's kind of
like the being of God has such power
that it takes something as dense as
physical matter to break off little bits
and pieces of the Divine
to develop individual
capacity that individuality is the great
gift of the mother it actually is the
great gift of physical existence itself
the experience of being an individual so
that whatever happens we will always be
an individual we won't be swallowed up
and lose our identity
forever now you know that most
idealistic philosophies of
interpretations of Hinduism and some
spiritual misss say well you see when
you achieve enlightenment then when you
die the drop returns to the ocean the
self just you dissolve into the totality
of being and you cease to exist as an
individual I'm I'm thinking of a bad
word right now we can all we can all
hear
it I don't believe that that's true
that's not the truth in my experience in
my experience
that no
matter how many times the ego dies it
gives birth to a deeper individuality
when that individual individuality dies
it gives birth to a still deeper form of
individuality individuality is one of
the great gifts of the creative
Enterprise and uh I don't think we do
return to the source we do return to the
all but the universe didn't spend 13.7
billion years gestating this
individuality just to have it reabsorbed
into the totality so we go go back to
the totality but not so as to suffocate
our individuality but actually enhance
and deepen our
individuality can you um Define that
individuality as a say between the
Oneness and Bunny the personality where
does that individuality fall what is
that that look like in dark at early
Dawn where I'm exploring u a lot lot of
different areas I'm exploring the
connective tissue of Consciousness I'm
exploring Collective Consciousness and
exploring the relationship between
individual Evolution and Collective
Evolution how they're all intertwined so
with a deep appreciation for the
connective tissue that we are all part
of the last chapter in that book is
called the fate of individuality as I
address the question what you know some
religious systems extinguish
individuality and I don't think is what
is that individuality and the closest I
can get to a definition of it is a
functional definition a process
definition is the capacity for
integrated
experience I can't get more specific
than that because the nature of
individuality changes as the soul
matures and so if you can't you can't
Define it in terms of content because
the content is open-ended but what does
seem to be consistent is the capacity to
to integrate experience so you're
integrating you learn you integrate you
become more you learn you integrate and
you become more and this is why I really
don't agree with that with llo that when
we are that the Universe just creates
Egos and then swallows them up into the
akashic memory the akashic field is
real but individuality is also real and
it's a both end and I think we can use
last L's feel Theory to actually
describe the Dynamics of the soul in a
way which is more accurate but it's
truly a both end situation thank you
Gary and then here and then here what do
you think about the uh a concept of I've
heard from Shinto and other Traditions
that ultimately the soul creates their
own
Universe uh Newton and and some others
have said that when a
soul when a soul kind of graduates at a
point where you can continue in the
spiritual world if you want to or you
can stay within the physical Enterprise
if you want to but if you are graduate a
graduate you can create an entire
universe he does you can create an
entire
universe that we we are the types of
beings we think of ourselves in such
underestimate terms we are beings who
can create galaxies once mature you know
that's what that's the size and scale of
what we're talking about yeah thank
we're doing that Workshop next
week was here then
here um to what Gary was saying um in '
86 um I experienced and I was talking at
lunchtime with others in here I called
it in I didn't know at the time of
spiritual emergency for lack of a better
word and rather than having all of the
beauty it was like I created Dante's
Inferno you know I was born Pentecostal
wholeness and I created that hell Within
Myself yeah um to me as I was going
through that it was 18 months that I was
in that um my family just kind of left
it open for me to pretty much experience
although they were scared you know but
through that time I knew that my soul
was so
damaged until I was
experiencing what my soul was feeling
and somehow I knew that I was working
things out you know know yeah but 18
months I was like that and then all of a
sudden one day you know I said well I
need to go and get some help so I went
had myself committed but you know after
that
time it didn't happen immediately but
two or three years after
that the entire time that I was inside I
called it I went Within
I didn't really feel like I was
individualized I didn't feel like I I
felt like I was I didn't have I was a
part of nothing yeah you know I didn't I
wasn't anybody I wasn't you know I
couldn't do anything I was nothing I was
little everybody else was big but I was
little
yeah and but I everything that went on
in that time when I was within I wrote
about it yeah so through that writing
and what I
experienced I found out that I could
write and whenever I got outside of that
that hell become Heaven if that makes
sense because it gave me an opportunity
to pull from that hell that I was in and
see that
beauty because I had been there yeah I
had done something I was an individual
person God had took me in and told me
secrets and showed me things that nobody
else had seen so whenever I came back
out I had an absolute I was a totally
different person with a different
concept than the person that I went in
with yeah so I guess in a sense of what
Gary was saying my soul did create the
world that it wanted but ultimately it
was to get me it was like wake up it's
time to wake up yeah
I don't believe in an eternal Hill I
think that's an
Abomination but I do believe that there
are hell
Realms and if a person has goes through
a very terrible traumatic
experience they they they have
nightmares because they've got a a hell
experience living inside their psyche
and until they clear that it's there now
just think of all the Terrible things
that have happened to human beings in h
history think of all the people who died
World War I think of all the people who
died traumatically World War II and the
people who died in the Philippines this
last week just think of the Human family
with all of the trauma that Humanity has
undergone and if the human psyche has is
a single Consciousness if there is a
collective psyche then there just as we
we have levels of our mind which have
pockets of hell inside of them then
there are pockets of Hell in the human
psyche and if you read the biographies
or autobiographies of of some saints and
great
practitioners you'll they go into these
hell Realms and they spend a long time
in these hell Realms in order to heal
not themselves but to actually help heal
I think the collective psyche of
humanity and
so I think those Realms are there we get
into them through all sorts of different
sometime like a spiritual
emergency um and they they
are they're bigger than we are they have
they have a power all of their own and
ultimately even though they are long
live in terms of History they are
ultimately temporary because all trauma
can be healed and when it's healed it's
it clears and but Humanity if we are
giving birth to a new human if we are
giving birth to a higher form of human
life we have to heal all the human
history in order for human history to
move forward and that's why I think a
lot of people who do spiritual practice
very deep spiritual practice they spend
a lot of time in the hell Realm
uh I mentioned uh Roger wer and I was
giving a talk on this at a conference
one time and Roger was there and he and
I had lunch together and I was talking
about the hell realm and I was talking
about the discovery that when you go
into the hell
realm it's not about healing yourself
it's about healing the collective and he
came to the same conclusion on the B on
his past life therapy work he was taking
people into past life and he said there
were just one lifetime after another
lifetime after another lifetime trauma
after trauma after trauma and he
eventually came to the conclusion that
this couldn't be simply people who were
had amassed a long history of trauma
something else had to be a foot and he
became convinced that his clients were
people who were taking on Collective
pain taking on life other people's
lifetimes in the way of suffering in
order to clear the Collective
field and I think actually we are in one
of those periods of History where the
hell realm is coming to the surface and
we are 21st century is going to be a a
hellish century and all of this is part
of a collective transformative process
you have to get out the
pain in order to clear the system so
that the system can take in Greater Joy
and greater
Beauty
thank you for sharing your
experience when you were talking about
signature I mean you know sound
obious when when I meet a person and and
you know and I don't have to know them
that well but there is a sense or
feeling that I have about them over un
above their words looks anything it's
like it has to you know think that's
what you talking about but could could
it be that that aspect that signature
that you're talking about could be just
a Divine gift of
Personality that goes with us throughout
eternity you know just like we have a
soul and just like we have the spark of
the divine within us all those Eternal
elements you know that are helping build
the moral body you know then that
personality that that disting Mark that
even if a million years passes by and we
see that person they don't have to say a
word and we can feel their Essence yeah
you know that Personality
yeah I think I agree with the concept I
use a different vocabulary because our
word personality is so connected to
individual ego that it tends to carry
that quality so I I just preer the word
individuality but the way you're using
the term personality I think it's inter
that basic concept that there is a
unique identity that identity is us at
the deepest level and it is a gift we
didn't give it to
ourselves you know it was birthed in the
system and once birthed it never goes
away it's always there and I I think you
can you can feel it inside
people yes about a year and a half ago
purchased couple of bottles of EX
Tylenol and I was going to end my life
so I took about of the 200 I like
175 and I wound up in um Cedar sin and
it was really weird because I was very
at peace with what I was doing I really
really wanted to go but then when I
spoke to the first doctor he said to me
well you'll probably have permanent Li
damage
and you probably only have like two or
three days to live but I didn't know how
to feel about that because like I you
know I didn't plan to wake up and have
to deal with well do I yeah oh but
that's not my question my question is
there's quite a bit of suicidality in my
family so is this show up in the books
about suicidality or have I
another No in fact there also there was
a question asked earlier what about
suicide you
know sleep what is well I didn't answer
we we came up during break um so what
about
suicide first of all the past life
therapy evidence is that suicide can
become a habit like anything
else got watchic if you have a we needan
another anonymous
group if you get you know if you get
overwhelmed you get in a situation where
you just feel like you can't deal with
it anymore I'm going to end it it is a
coping it's a lack of coping
skill what we find is that people who
commit suicide in one lifetime uh
sometimes have a tendency to choose that
as a as an option in subsequent life
Chris can you hold the mic closer there
you go thank you it's I feel like I'm
smoking the cigar
here it can become habit forming it can
become an exit
strategy but it doesn't really solve
things now what are the consequences of
committing
suicide uh I think the best wisdom I've
seen in all the literature is uh the
consequence of committing suicide is you
have to repeat the
grade if you flump the fifth grade we
don't take you out and torture you for
the rest of your life we just simply say
you have to take the fifth grade over
again yeah so if you CH if you know not
everybody commits suicide for quote bad
reasons I mean you know but if you
choose suicide out of inability to cope
the worst that happens I think is that
you have to come back and maybe even
more demanding circumstances in order to
face the challenges that you weren't and
to solve the issues that you weren't
able to solve before um but well I've
mentioned Robert Monroe the Monroe
Institute I mean he the guy who wrote
three books and he's an out of body kind
of person he created the Monroe
Institute in paper Virginia he says you
can check out anytime you want anybody
can leave anytime they want
without Cosmic judgment he feels very
strongly about
this but it doesn't mean that there
isn't there aren't karmic consequences
not in the sense of judgment but a
habits that can get established and I
don't think suicide is a successful
coping strategy
it just interrupts the process then you
got to get born again you got to go
through gestation again you got to go
through diapers again just to get
yourself back into the situation where
you can face whatever it was that took
you out the last time so it's one of
those things where I don't think it's
the worst thing that you can do but it's
not the best thing either so best to
work with what it is that you've got
yourself into until you can get through
it
but if you lost someone to Suicide
they're not outside of Love they're not
outside the universe they go home they
don't go to hell they go home I'll tell
you another piece of research there was
a guy who uh wanted to study uh
near-death episodes of people who
attempted to commit
suicide so he studied this is an early
study David Rosen he studied people who
tried to commit suicide by jumping off
the Golden Gate Bridge in San Francisco
you jump off the Golden Gate you got
about a 97% chance of dying so it's a
pretty serious suicide attempt he found
that there were eight people who had
jumped and
survived he was able to track down seven
of them he also Tracked Down six people
who had jumped off the uh the Golden
Gate Bridge I guess the uh the Bay
Bridge I guess if the Golden Gate is
busy you can always go around the
corner here's what he found he found
that every person who attempted to
commit suicide by jumping off either of
these Bridges went instantly into
ecstatic Transcendent State of
Consciousness they went straight into
the near-death episode white light
totality of Consciousness
instantly and not a single person ever
tried to commit suicide again because
they learned the soul was not killed
when you kill the body nothing is solved
by committing suicide it just LS the
inevitable so they weren't punished but
they never tried to commit suicide again
because they discovered that suicide is
an illogical action because you think
you can solve the problem by killing the
body you solve you do not solve the
problem like killing the
body I think that's that work I thought
was really I heard one of those people
interview the lady yeah she said that
she she just was grateful that she
survived and never tried again
and process whatever her issues
were Chris yes do you in your
perspective and research do you feel
like the research is showing that our
prayers our blessings our thoughts are
impacting those beloveds who did suicide
or impact those beloveds we know crossed
over with huge amounts of angst or fear
our prayers and thoughts impact them in
a positive way yes I think so
um the community of Heaven is a
community that is in rapport with the
community of Earth and we who are
embodied
can communicate with and assist those
who have died in the Monroe institute
there's a program you can they actually
train people how to go into a state of
consciousness where they they literally
kind of leave their body and and find
people who are stuck in the postmortem
State and actually assist them and take
them into the park he calls it that the
and once you're in the park then you'll
be able to get on and there but a lot of
people some people not a lot a few
people when they die they don't know
that they're dead or they're confused
they just kind of disorient we can we
can get to those people and and help
them move beyond their uncertainty and
their fears in uh Tibetan Buddhism uh
which I practice within among other
things uh there is a practice called
shitro which is a practice for the
Recently departed and you do the
practice precisely for someone who is
dead in order to bring to them the
opportunity to tr to move to their soul
who might otherwise get caught I my
sister works for Hospital
and so when she gets clients who are
having very difficult death processes
when uh she'll ask me to do chitro for
them and uh and so I do a lot of chitro
for people I don't
know and it often happens when I'm doing
this practice that I I see things I just
get visual Impressions and uh so I
always am really careful because you
know you don't never really know exactly
the truth of what it is you're seeing
but I relay them to her and she relays
them to the
client's wife mother whatever and I I
find consistently we find that what I
what I
see that what is
seen contains a core truth which
identifies that it's real that this
person is actually there they're wearing
a particular shirt or they're sitting in
a particular chair and it's the real
shirt their favorite shirt or their real
chair and you I have many times helped
people get into the clear space the
diamond light
space and this is a practice which has
been taught for over a thousand years so
there's thousands and thousands of
beings as a matter of course think that
they can help the beings who have died
to get where they need to be in order to
make clear decisions so I very very much
believe that we can do that yes um my
husband died last year and I was having
I was having a hard time like I didn't I
was feeling his energy but trying to
block it off yeah because I thought it
would go quicker if I did that so I
really thought it started to feel like I
was going crazy a little bit so this
very intuitive person told me that he
was in a learning
place and that um he couldn't process a
lot while he was alive cuz he had um
autism which no one knew about I mean
those days so anyway so he was in a a
burning place to process this life like
he couldn't and that she thought like
she thought his grandfather or someone
like that was with him someone who loved
him was with him and helping him and
after she told me that all of a sudden
it just his energy everything made
yeah and and she said just be open to it
just open to his energy and I really
felt then that my relationship with him
wasn't over and then I was actually
helping him while he was in that
Learning Place like when I would
remember him or feel his energy very
strongly like I was helping him to
understand
yeah
yeah thank you thank you for sharing
that that's you know the I don't
remember the exact percentage 60 70% of
husbands and wives whose spouse dies
have experience of being in in contact
with them in some form or another I mean
it's a majority experience that people
have the experience of the recently
departed and that's the most natural
thing in the to in the world in a
universe that I'm describing here of
course they would want to come back and
touch B of course there would be some
Rapport and if there is that Rapport
then then we can help
them
yeah yes so uh so her husband who she's
speaking of was a very good friend of
mine and um it's it was so
interesting uh when he
was very very very close to death so he
had hospice come in so this this
woman because of there was so much
prayer and her pray and she could feel
so much prayer and so much going just
prayer I mean it was basically
prayer that she was feeling and saw
marine and and people well we're
Buddhists and we chance so she saw so
much uh prayer for La of a better
word even on
Randy's dying moments he was still able
to encourage somebody this hospice
worker with with his wife even though
even though he was ready to go here he
was still here in spirit and this woman
this hospice woman was so
encouraged by the family and by the
praise that she saw and by ry's life
rather than Randy's death yeah and and
we know that to be so because she's come
back to his year memorial service she's
come back to um I think she came back
twice to something we had can't remember
exactly but anyways uh it was all this
incredible experience even though here
there was still so much encouraging
going on here
yeah prayer prayer there was so much
prayer that was clearly
yeah
it's all this um I mean we understand
that death is weeping and hurting we we
are left behind but for the soul who's
leaving it's joy and celebration and the
more we can hold joy and celebration
more we can hold the Deep Vision more we
can support them in the process that
they're going through now the worst
thing is the Weeping and nashing here to
really think that this is real that
there death is taking place termination
end point this is all there is and and
that's what my students are taught in
practically every course at the
University they take except mine you
know they're taught bi biology classes
chemistry all their courses that death
is the end doctors are failures if they
if your patients
die death is
graduation death is the great release
not that it's for permanent release but
it's a great
release let me do a a time check okay
it's time to shift categories are we
ready to shift y all right
uh I hope you read we got two of these
in the bookstore I hope you read these
books these are wonderful
books time to go to psychedelic
resarch
did you bring it up for
everybody time we talking about this uh
this Workshop I'm working right now on
on dark night early Dawn is about
psychedelic research and I'm working on
a book which is kind of the next book in
this series and psychedelic research is
my area of specialty as a
philosopher um and so we said okay I
said how about if we do this on the
discussion of death from the different
perspectives and psychedelic work is
part of that for me and if people are
okay with it if we find that people are
comfortable maybe I'll come back next
year and we'll do an entire workshop on
psychedelics because we have so many
misunderstandings and so many fears
about psychedelics and it's I think it's
so important I think represent a before
and after in philosophical work because
it just it changes the landscape so just
a couple of things first uh we've been
doing this for a long time and these are
three books which I'm just bring here
just to point out that psychedelics have
been with Humanity for a very long time
and I'm not going to talk about these
books I just want to mention them uh the
first book for us Visions written by
Alex
POI
UA he is one of the founders of their
two psychedelic their two iasa churches
in Brazil
Sant and uh de
vegal iasa is a very powerful
psychedelic which results from combining
two particular plants it's about its
usage goes back 1500 years it's
integrated with Christianity you know
once the Spaniards came and brought
Christianity kind there's an amalgam and
it's a very very powerful healing
substance there now Americans are doing
iasa and there's a community in Ashland
who has taken their case all the way to
the Supreme Court and won the right to
use
iasa as non Brazilians as Caucasian
Americans in their community so when
they bring the iasa from Brazil they're
met at the airport by a department of
drug enforcement agency and the
representative of the church it's coming
into this country there is another iasa
community in Houston which is likewise
won the right to be doing
iasa uh the second book is a book by
Ralph nner on iasa it's an anthology
people's experiences so on so forth and
the third book is also by Ral mner it's
an anthology on sacred mushrooms Cil C
mushrooms Native Americans you've been
using mushrooms for years as a healing
ritual they used peyote they've used
mesculin this is nothing new so what I'm
going to talk about is not new what I'm
going to talk about is the rediscovery
of this ancient healing modality in
contemporary scientific context right so
the person I want to talk about is
Stanis
BR who is the foremost authority I think
today on integrating psychedelics into
the therapeutic process he was
Czechoslovakian born he started his work
after graduating from Medical School the
first day after he graduated from
medical school he did his first LSD
session he is the foremost authority on
the psychoactive effects of LSD and
integrating it into the therapeutic
process he's written about I think 15 16
books by m stand is his upper
70s this book Realms of the human
unconscious changed my life uh it was
published right about the time I
finished graduate school so when I came
out of graduate school and I began work
at gtown state it was only then that I
became aware of the real significance of
psychedelics I didn't do drugs in high
school I didn't do drugs in college I
did not do well a little bit Dr I didn't
do drugs in graduate school was only
when I was 29 years old
that I began to
systematically begin to work with
psychedelics now in 1978 when I finished
graduate school my government had made
psychedelics
illegal it had said in 1969 1970 there
is no value to these substances they're
going to be scheduled as we criminalize
them that put me in a hard spot because
Stan had just begun to publish he had
already published hundreds of articles
there were literally 3,000 essays
published on psychedelics in the 60s
and' 70s tremendous therapeutic
potential but you know what happened the
60s happened and then everything came
crashing to a stop in
I I knew that psychedelics were going to
come back eventually I knew that they
were so important that our culture was
going to not abandon them that we would
find their way back to working with
these very powerful sacred
medicines but I knew that by the time we
did that I'd be an old
man and I I was not willing to wait so
what I did was I began to work with
psychedelics using Stan gr's methodology
and I'll describe that methodology in a
second but that meant going underground
and there are I became part of a
community of people who are working
conscientiously their therapeutically
and philosophically with psychedelics
not like Timothy lirry not like Ron D
not like Richard Alber who you know been
Ron BS in his previous Incarnation at
Harvard but doing it in a different kind
of
modality uh but but that me going
underground and uh I'm now beginning to
write up that work between 1979 and
1999 I did 73 high do LSD sessions
massive quantities of LSD if I've
probably done more LSD than just about
anybody you
know but I don't look that crazy
D you're not talking about street drugs
you're talking about pure LSD I'm
talking about pure pharmaceutical grade
LSD what you get on the street very
different animal but and I don't and I'm
not talking about tripping
I mean I've read all the literature and
psychedelics and if you want to see all
the things that went wrong in the 60s
you can read a book called storming
Heaven which is a history of
psychedelics in the 60s there's another
book called tripping where people share
their experiences of tripping I'm not
talking about tripping what's the
difference between the therapeutic use
of psychedelics and tripping first of
all let me just restrict myself to Ellis
yeah go ahead I really hate to do this
but I I didn't ask two questions I had
about the
previous we I really regret I they'll
tie into this but um
okay when people are the one when we're
at that jumping off place and and that
Clarity that if you know if or or
suicide are checking out that that
realization that we can't leave we can
get rid of the body I had that
experience it was very powerful it was
just one of the most powerful
experiences I ever had and it was so
clear that I would just have to start
over be stuck there just was not an
interesting place and it never crossed
my mind again in a real way I've also
had an experience kind of induced by
some of this stuff and and other things
where there was no way I could see the
things I was seeing with my eyes and I
was way too far away where I could
normally hear people and felt like I was
leaving and torn in that in that state
of absolute Bliss but also not done here
and knowing that I wasn't done here um
but what I thought was a hallucination
over time after connecting with people
that were Within
a few short distances that place where
everything I heard them say was what
they were saying the direction they were
standing facing the the what they were
everything they were doing and saying
they told me it was real I thought it
was all I thought it was hallucination
but these were all real experiences yeah
and the and the questions of this
present so many other things said in
that yeah when we you I got really
confused when I first got here because I
just I'm I'm have a strong belief system
something I can't really understand but
the the one this illusion of
separateness that believe that we're all
interconnected but I don't comprehend it
in words and but also this illusion of
time and space um Do You
Believe do you believe we talk about
these different spaces that we go
through different transitions that we
can access any time in space if we're in
tune um and I don't I It's
Tricky Einstein taught us that the
universe live in as time space it's a
four-dimensional universe right three
dimensions of space and one dimension of
time and so time and space is Unified
Fabric and uh we have reasons to think
that there are parts of the universe
which are traveling faster than light
and therefore they they are not
inhibited by time the way we are in the
large size of
things if you are able to enter into a
state of conscious in which you move
beyond space as we know it part of that
is also moving beyond time as we know it
and so I do I know from personal
experience that it is possible to move
into trans what psychologist called
trans temporal experience or to move in
a different temporal reality to move
outside time and space as we ordinarily
think of it but it's not like there is
time and then no time there are many
permeability there's a permeability and
there many variations on the time space
continuum so that you can move into
states of awareness
where uh a thousand years will pass in 5
seconds you're in a in a temporally
dilated State you can move into 100,000
million year time Landscapes that these
are this is just the way time exists in
those variables and you can move
completely outside time space reality Al
together and go into reality which is
not time Limited at
all so I think that there are variations
on this
process and when we tap into those
things where you were talking about you
know what shirt someone was wearing or
or examples like that which I've
experienced and like I said thought they
were hallucination you think that's
a Amplified Clarity of what's just hyper
senses
um it's not that there are not
hallucinations which is to see something
which isn't
real but there are true legitimate
Visions where you see things which are
real but are are not restricted by time
space reality the way we conventionally
think of it traditionally we say all of
its
hallucinations but there are people who
have experiences and people who have
near-death experiences who go into the
future future and that future happens
the way they saw it enough that we know
that it is possible to have Vision to
have experiences of future reality even
in time and in this time and space
moment so we know that it's
possible then after that we have to go
to the
particulars but also what he's talking
about we can our Consciousness can be in
more than one place time so our
Consciousness can be expansive enough
that we can pick up on a conversation or
see things hear things sense things
where our body isn't over there but our
our sense
our spiritual sensing I guess is the
best term that's coming to me now we
can
we're we have that available to us a
woman's playing
golf and at a at a particular tea at a
particular time suddenly she has an
overwhelming sense that one of her
children is in trouble and she plays out
the golf game and she goes home and she
gets a phone call with she gets inside
and it turns out her son had just had a
car accident exactly at the minute when
she felt it at that particular time on
the golf course so part of her is
obviously capable of sensing Beyond her
physical senses and we have lots of
cases like that
what's the difference between tripping
and serious uh psychedelic
work first of all and of course there
there are many psychedelics I mean you
have to take them individually LSD
psilocybon
MDMA MDT DMT so I don't want to
oversimplify but basically what we mean
when we classify a substance as a
psychedelic and I never use the word
hallucinogen because that's a
perjorative
materialist description because
Hallucination is when you see something
which isn't there but that's to make a
metaphysical judgment and I don't want
to use that category some people call it
entheogens that which awakens the divine
within that's okay if you have a pretty
broad definition of God I prefer the
term psychedelic mind opener mind
expander what these substances do is
they hypers sensitize Consciousness they
amplify Consciousness they do not give
you a particular experience they do not
cause you to see two people 100 people
on a psychedelic do not have the same
experience they hyper amplify your
Consciousness and then what happens is a
function of Consciousness itself not a
function of the drug it's a function of
the aroused State of
Consciousness usually when people take
psychedelics they're usually a
recreation taking it Recreation they
want to kind of have fun have a party
and they use this hypers stimulated
State and they stay in dialogue in the
physical world and the physical senses
come in their hyp sensitive
Consciousness kind of Rises up they get
a swirling mish mash of hallucinations
and trails and Spins and they kind of
have some fun go to a party the music is
so intense and and the insights are so
so interesting and d and when it's all
over nothing has changed they've just
kind of entertained themselves for a few
hours the Native Americans are not
interested in tripping they were only
interested in serious sacred medicine
work and the difference is this when you
work in a therapeutic modality first of
all you isolate yourself from the
physical
world in the old days they would climb
into AA you know what a is that
underground cave and underground hole in
the ground where they go down a ladder
and then you're sitting around the fire
and you pull up the ladder and you're
there Till Dawn you so you in
contemporary context you're lying down
and you're wearing eye
shades you're not in any contact with
the physical world so that whatever you
experience you know it's coming from you
and that's kind of
important and then you're listening to
very carefully selected music and we've
we if psychodelic has a particular time
curve we know if you're taking LSD and
you're it's going to have an ex ation is
going to impact within about total of 45
minutes you're going to be on a peak
that's going to last maybe four or 5
hours it's going to have a tail it's
going to last another 3 or 4 hours and
we know that we can choose music that
will support what happens in each of
those stages so there's essays and works
which have been written on the kind of
music you want to help you break through
the and to confront what you need to
confront and then slowly integrate and
then slowly come back and return it's
it's a complicated process but but the
basic vision is this when you hyper
stimulate your Consciousness what starts
to happen is that your Consciousness
starts to purify itself it starts to
heal itself and in order to heal itself
it has to bring forward what needs
healing so it has to bring forward all
the pain it has to bring forward
anything which is unfinished business
and sometimes from this life sometime
from other lifetimes it brings forward
physical trauma when you had whooping
off when you were 5 years old and you
almost died and the physical memory of
that is still in your
body it brings forward all the
existential questions it brings forth
all the deep deep philosophical
questions it brings
forward all the uncertainty we have
about whether life is Meaningful whether
there is any logic to the process
basically what happens is as the system
begins to detoxify itself you come to
crisis
points and most people when they
confront these crisis
points the same thing to do is kind of
run away you do not want to go into the
pain you want to get away from the pain
but in therapy when you're working
therapeutically or as a sacred medicine
you learn to go into the pain you learn
to go deeper and deeper into what it is
that's causing you problems
if you learn to go into the pain the
pain becomes your Ally and you suffer
you suffer terribly you suffer
physically there's tremendous physical
pain involved and you suffer
psychologically and you suffer
existentially and
spiritual but if you navigate that
crisis skillfully if you if you have a
good sitter and by the way you never
ever want to do this by yourself I mean
it's just it's not safe you need
somebody there who's going to control
the outer world you need somebody that's
going to be your Lifeline if you
navigate that confrontation successfully
the pattern is you reach a a crisis
point you reach a breakthrough point and
you have to be comfortable losing
control because you lose control your
mind is functioning at 100 times more
power than it normally functions you
lose control and you go through some
type of death process you you go through
some some type of absolute loss of your
life as you knew
it you
die and the Miracle is after you're
completely
dead you wake up in a different reality
in a different world as a different kind
of being than you were going into
it there have been people who have done
psychedelics heavy psychedelics for 150
times that have never ever gone through
this process it's not easy it's not fun
it's excruciatingly difficult work and
all the Native American traditions know
this the iasa Traditions know this the
Elan Mysteries know this in ancient
Greece but Plato Marist were part
of as a
philosopher when I read Stan's work I
knew that this was a methodology that
allowed us to to actually explore the
consciousness of the universe in a way
that there are other Traditions there
are other ways to explore the Universe I
mean there are people who withdraw into
the mountains for decades and Decades of
isolation in meditation to explore the
universe the Kalahari Bushmen explore
the universe through trans dancing some
people explore by nearly dying it's a
very effective way it's kind of it's
little difficult going through sacred
medicine work is simply a different
modality of doing what human beings have
always done and that is to explore the
world that we live
in and very quickly you find out that
your individual ego is just a shell it's
just a shell that you can you can
dissolve you can pop it it's a balloon
that just pops and when you pop it you
move into a deeper State of
Consciousness where you literally are a
different life form you're not simply a
human being but you can kind of move
into a state in which you literally
become Humanity itself you you can move
into merger with the collective psyche
of the human species and the
purification continues at that level you
don't you go through the death rebirth
process again in subsequent session but
now no longer as an individual but now
as
Humanity you go through this cycle of
death rebirth I've learned it's a cycle
that repeats itself over and over again
the deeper and deeper you
go okay along the
way when you break through into this
deeper reality that's why I feel deep
kinship with even Alexander and the near
episode people
because they're talking about things
that I know from personal experience you
can go through the death
process before you actually die
physically and then in many ways the
spiritual death process is much worse
than the physical death process because
when you go through the physical process
of dying part of you knows that the
psyche is okay because you've been
through this before the psyche is going
to not going to be killed by the body
dying but if you go through a spiritual
death process you're going to a process
which is actually Deeper Than Physical
dying because that nucleus which
transfers intact after the death of the
body it is that nucleus which is itself
dying in this
process why would you do something as
stupid as that why would you go into
that much
suffering in
order and and the answer is well I was
trained as a philosopher I wanted to
know what the structure the universe was
I wanted to explore whether there was
any meaningful tapestry I mean I wanted
to cross the ocean I wanted to see what
was there and you can you can explore
what's there you can come to have
firsthand personal
experience of the larger Cosmos that we
are part of and uh it's not for
everybody it's not certainly not for I
don't advise it for a lot of people you
don't need to do it um but you can do it
and if you do it one of the things that
happens is you lose your fear of death
absolutely for the same reason that near
death episode people lose their fear of
death because you
know
experientially that you are a being who
cannot die it's impossible for you to
die as a spiritual being your physical
being can die your personality can die
but that germ you were talking about
that underlying Essence that cannot die
they can only be liberated into deeper
and deeper
manifestation so if you wanted to look
now this all the books I've shown you
are kind of pretty easy reading not this
is not a difficult book to read this his
first book but if you're in terms of
death these
books what I consider the most important
of stands many books
on focused on the issue of death now the
first one and the reason these look all
kind of rumed is because these are my
books I spped them on the scanner and
took a picture
of LSD the cych therapy is a manual that
was written in
1980 a manual written for doctors and
nurses and psychologists on how to
do re uh LSD Psychotherapy it's a nuts
and bolts methodology he wrote this
after LSD was
illegal and he wrote it for two reasons
one he knew people were doing this work
anyway
underground and two he knew that we
would get back to it we would bring it
back within our repertoire of scientific
investigation and it was important to
document and Stan by this time had over
5,000 sessions with LSD sessions with
with his clients he had been doing this
work for 20 years before it was
illegal and he wanted to bring it down
to document this is a technical manual
on how to run LSD sessions counter
indications screening implications how
do you manage it the difference between
lowd dose therapy and high dose therapy
very different lowd do therapy is kind
of peeling this the the onion by layer
by layer high do therapy is like blowing
through the layers very quickly going
right through layers it's a very
different kind of
project he did low bills therapy in
Czechoslovakia taking people into a 100
sessions layer by layer layer by layer
resolving it layer by layer gave him a
very detailed map when he came to Spring
Grove Hospital in Baltimore Maryland
they started a new research project
working with terminally ill patients
cancer patients they were terminally ill
it was not any attempt to try to heal
them what it we're trying to do was
prepare them for dying and so they did a
maximum of three sessions high do
basically they were experimenting with
triggering a near-death
experience deliberately under controlled
circumstances and they
succeeded they
succeeded tell us how how yeah I mean
what did people report I mean was the
anxiety about death so diminished that
it was completely gone or how give us a
report well there's he wrote he co-wrote
a book with his then wife Joan Halifax
who's an anthropologist who's now a Zen
roshi uh called a human encounter with
death if you wanted to see the actual
details go to that book a human
encounter with death what they were
found that we can if you take a very
very high dose of LSD and you contain it
and you you compress it you go through
lots of layers you go through a lot of
psychodynamic layers but you can you go
go through a death rebirth process that
basically projects you into a state of
consciousness which is the Consciousness
that you move into when you
die from that perspective you can you
can awaken the awareness that we saw in
near death episode people said I was
remembering how could I have forgotten
this I was remembering well that's what
happens in these sessions people
remember who they are they remember the
deeper truth some people one person was
a very very mod he was a janitor a very
modest intellectual uh and he was
Catholic very traditional catholic and
he had a very very detailed encounter
with
reincarnation and he came back he was
all embarrassed he he really didn't know
what to do with because he saw the truth
of reincarnation in his
sessions and he had to integrate that
into his
Catholicism yeah okay so what I'm
hearing is
okay so I don't have the experience I
never like of that word tripped um but I
was very very much in that realm many
many people around me in that time and
everything you're
saying everything you're saying sounds
exactly what I've personally witnessed
in
people of course it was
underground of course it was underground
um
so I'm not understanding the difference
and I don't want to get caught up here
just on the GL tripping but um what what
you're saying I have I've seen that yeah
happen with people not you know in a in
a yeah not not in the climate that
you're talking about but in yeah outside
of that yeah you know if you if you take
a psychedelic know
if you
take let's let's stay with LSC for a
minute
um you do if you stay in touch with the
world you you know people talk about a
bad
trip and they that was bad assd you know
that was a bad trip I don't ever want to
go back there
again but in therapy a bad trip is a
good trip yeah yeah in the street a bad
trip is just a bad trip it's something
you want to avoid you do not want to go
into it what you learn in therapy is a
bad trip means your system is purifying
itself and you want to you want to purge
those poisons and you want to go deeper
into that um because when you purge
those poisons your system is going to
move into a deeper experience of
reality you there are lots of times and
if you read the literature like this
book tripping you'll see people have all
sorts of glimpses into interconnectivity
and glimpses into and they'll have you
know various psychic experiences where
they can merge with the mind of people
around them or things like this the
difference is one of degree and one of
clarity and one of lasting
impact lasting impact it's D degree
Clarity and lasting impact so you did
ask it and you changed your whole life I
mean you know we used to do acid when
Sandos trucks Got Hijacked and that was
like the ultimate acid because it was
pharmaceutical acid yeah and it was in
the' 60s and it was exactly like what
you're talking about I mean I you one of
the things Stephen job said was one of
the better choices he made when he was
in college was to do acid you know I see
that as having lasting impacts with him
I mean a lot somebody said you wouldn't
have your iPad if it wasn't for acid you
definitely wouldn't have the music on it
you know so I
think I've been around people in all
Realms of drug use people that are just
screwing around and have a good time and
the stuff that passed for LSD for some
recent decades which bore no resemblance
to what I remember as LSG but I've seen
a lot of people know the Discover of DNA
now kind of has admitted that his the
critical breakthrough came through when
he was on LSD right and rert sheldrake
and his important moric field theory was
LSD that gave him that breakthrough and
Alex gr who is the
Wonder so we may not have been doing it
in a clinical setting but you can't just
write off all the things that came from
that because they were entirely life
changing I don't mean to write it off or
diminish it um I C I certainly don't
they are lifechanging and they were
culture changing they gave us a
different
culture uh and yet at the same time
there is a difference because if you
read for example I think the best
history of the 60s is storming heaven
and I can't remember the author's name
it's a it's a wonderful book but what
happened is a lot of that catalytic
energy it washed through us but it
didn't take root it didn't hold it kind
of it changed lives but it didn't change
our culture the way we hoped it would it
just washed through and what I hope is
that when we come back into it in this
next way we can get a leverage that'll
help us change the fundamental culture
that will help us change the
understanding Chris as you as you know
you and I talked about this my
hesitation to even having this segment
in the workshop because there's still so
much
misunderstanding about psychedelic
research yeah um so there's a cultural
Prejudice about it still so but the
whole idea that these substances are
naturally occurring and have been used
for thousands of years for
expanding
Consciousness that there's there has to
be some good reason why these substances
were a part of our Human Experience yeah
and um what I'm really interested in is
looking at how many people now current
day who are returning to this as the
sacred medicine you're talking about it
hasn't always been used as sacred as we
know we can take anything and make it
sacred or unsacred and certainly been
used in unsacred ways but the sacred
ceremonial um uh use yeah
to expand our Consciousness this is what
I'm and I'm looking at a lot of the I
know Medical doctors who actually do
iasa with their patients a week or so
before they do major surgery you know
they're doing it as s sacred medicine
and that's really what I'm interested in
and I'm personally um uh I'm encouraged
that more people in the medical field
are catching hold of sacred medicine
versus medicine that's killing us
phace we're being killed by quote
medicine so if there's another way to
use sacred
medicine especially with treating
depression and anxiety and fear at
John's Hopkins is doing a research
project they've already published out of
they're continuing on the use of civil
in depression the use of civil sment to
treat post-traumatic stress syndrome
MDMA is being used with returning vs to
treat uh uh post-traumatic stress
syndrome so we're beginning to bring it
back into uh a therapeutic modality Ian
uh is an African psychedelic which has
an extraordinary capacity to interrupt
addiction even cocaine and heroin
addiction which as you know is the most
powerful uh you know the gets a grip on
the soul and it's hard to let go Ian can
produce a window of detoxification
of about 2 months that will allow you to
then intervene follow with interventions
of conventional therapeutic uh
interventions so we have a whole new
kind of generation of young researchers
who are beginning to use the sacred
medicines for
healing now personally I'm not a
psychologist and I'm not interested I'm
not my project is not healing stand as a
psychiatrist his project is healing he's
been all over the world and he's
developed non-drug modalities for
entering into these states you know I
should mention you know he was always
doing C certified protocols government
sanctioned protocols and when LSD was no
longer legal he and his wife developed a
non-drug protocol for entering into
these States called holotropic
breathwork and so that there are other
modalities for entering into these
states I was a philosopher
I was kind of like all the Su you
mentioned I'm interested in cosmology
I'm interested in in the structure of
the universe in that's a different
project than healing but if we can get
the sacred medicines back into the
repertoire of
healers then underneath healing the
personality and underneath healing the
heart there is healing the soul and the
only way to heal the soul is to connect
with the the essence of life the essence
of the Soul itself and when you connect
when you take it the healing down to
that level the only way to heal the soul
is to connect with the universe and to
enter into communion with the universe
itself and that is the classic work of
Mystics and Saints and and you know
lifelong meditators to me
psychedelics they're not they're not a
shortcut but what they are is an
intensifier of the spiritual process you
can accelerate it now I wouldn't do what
I did again I mean I I chose to work
with very high doses I did psychedelic
work for 73 sessions and there's a wear
and tear that comes I wouldn't take that
aggressive an approach now now that I
know what I know I would take a much
gentler path into
it having said that I wouldn't
trade the tentative name I'm working
with on this book you know you little
change maybe but right now I'm calling
it stealing diamonds from
Heaven you know
because imagine you could have a
near-death episode like we just touched
on you're going to read in some of these
books imagine if you could have that
experience 40
times yes
that's what we're looking at the what if
we could not only just a few handfuls of
individuals what if we could uh take a
thousand
individuals and take them into this
initiatory process a 100 times and
gather all of
their experiences and integrate them
into a a visual a picture of the
structure of the universe that's what I
think we're on we're right on the cusp
of doing we're we're on the edge of
being able to do that work in the
Traditions that work with sacred
medicines you know what they say they
say these medicines were given to us by
the sacred because the sacred knew when
we incarnated we were going to
forget and so the sacred medicines are
about remembering they're about waking
us up and helping us remember what we
forgot when we
incarnated and what are we trying to
remember we're trying to remember who we
are what we are what the purpose of life
is what is our connection to each other
we're we're trying to remember the
fundamental truths of life when you
remember then just along the side death
disappears there's not an anxiety around
death the same insights that emerge in
near death episode work emerge in sacred
medicine work you just death is not a
problem
yeah um I went for across I did the 10
times yeah and and what you're talking
about right now I had an experience
there that I never had in my life and it
was transformative I don't see the world
like I used to you know I lost all
sensation of my body I was flying around
out in space I was hearing alling voices
saying you are one with God and you know
I and I felt totally toally
I did not want to come back and the next
thing I knew is the facilit had hand on
my I opened my eyes and she said are you
all right okay but um that that was an
absolutely tremendous experience like
that I can't tell it's it's it's like
anybody who goes through any of the
experiences you can say in words there's
no language to describe that it's an
experience that I had and and there's
been none in life
that in a way um the Psychedelic aspect
is a red hering you know it's like it's
not about psychedelics holotropic breath
work you know how they do it
hyperventilation internal body work
music and hyperventilation for a couple
of hours at a time it's psychedelics is
just a method it's not what what we're
looking at is the release potential of
consciousness the nature mind itself and
and that's the important thing and you
can you can release That Power by nearly
dying you can release that power with
hypnosis or you can release it through
psychedelics or meditation meditation
than you for mentioning that mention my
my my first
wife whom I love dearly she was my
sitter for all of my work for 20 years
she was my sitter she's a clinical
psychologist she she never did a single
session
herself she's one of the most she's a
very spiritually oriented person her
path is meditation she's completed her
three-year solo Meditation Retreat in
the Tibetan Buddhist tradition she's a
natural meditator she never did a
psychedelic session but she was my she
was my lifeline during all of my
psychedelic sessions and it was only
after doing about 15 years of this work
that I began to understand
her it's not about psychedelics it's
about different methods for working with
Consciousness we're coming to the end of
our time let me just
mention the cosmic game was written four
books after LSD psycho therapy Stan
wrote several books about for written
for clinicians written in the clinical
methodology looking for all the
indications and so on so forth
eventually he wrote a book which is
about the cosmological implications of
this work the model of the universe that
emerges from Deep psychedelic work and
that's this book The Cosmic game it's a
wonderful wonderful book and then later
he wrote this last book The Ultimate
Journey which he specifically the
ultimate journey is death and so he's
looking it's a masterful scholarly work
but also integrated with uh his own
personal experiences and other
psychedelic voyagers experiences
exploring the phenomenon of death from
that perspective so it it's just it's
the straight on implications of
psychedelic work for the experience of
dying and then I just mentioned one last
piece bring my
down all this is dark early Dawn all of
my work is basically situated within
st's
tradition this is my first book on
psychedelic work and
um so I incorporate I think if you're
going to do philosophy in this genre you
have to reveal the experiences that are
the foundation of your thinking all
philosophical reflection assumes a
shared experience if I give an
indication a counter example to in an
argument I'm assuming that we have a
certain body of experience and so if I
give an example you'll understand what
I'm talking
about but most people don't have
advanced psychedelic experience so if
you're going to present a philosophical
argument based upon experience you have
to be willing to put your experiences on
the table and say these are not perfect
these are incomplete tell me where I
went wrong but these are the experiences
that I'm using to draw these conclusions
and so I integrate my own psychedelic
experiences in this book I put them on
the table and I integrate it in a
discussion with other people's
exploration and using different
methodologies this way of doing
philosophy is a new way of doing
philosophy here we temporarily lose
contact with the physical world we go
into a non-ordinary state we have a set
of experiences we come back and write
them down and then we analyze them I've
spent
now 14 years analyzing 20 years worth of
psychedelic experience and it's only now
that I'm really beginning to write the
whole story it's not enough to have an
ex experience you have to understand it
you have to think about it you have to
plug it into the literature you have to
think about the you you have to plug it
into an intellectual landscape in order
to extract its philosophical
value along the way I'll just I'll end
with just one
experience small experience just long I
was
being taken out into what I call Deep
time out into deep time into
the opportunity to see where humanity is
being taken into into the future human
time into that world so we're on a on a
scale of hundreds of thousands of years
and I was going and all of a sudden
everything expanded real quick all of a
sudden I just going pow everything Po
and I said what
happened and the in the voice I was the
intelligence I was with said oh we just
we passed your
death it's like I was going forward in
time and I passed when I would die and
when you pass your death you don't have
the the glue that holds you in a
particular configuration you you just
expand in that larger
domain I've gone in and out of that the
space so many times that it's kind of
become I'm more comfortable there and
that's why I love the near-death episode
research the difference with the
near-death episode research and this
type of research is this when most
near-death episode people only have one
shot at that reality a few of them have
had two or three near-death episodes but
mostly you get one
shot you get an intense
experience but you don't always see the
full landscape because you get a quick
it's like seeing a a landscape in
Arizona at night and you got a flash of
lightning that shows you the landscape
and you see it all but you don't see it
all but if you could go back 40 5050
times then you have a much deeper
perception of that reality also because
you go through many death and rebirths
you go deeper and deeper into reality
deeper into into the cosmos itself and
you get a more complete portrait of
what's
real it's not about psychedelics it's
about the nature of mind it's about
exploring the the nature of the mind of
the universe and along the way along
with all the other work we're looking at
death what is death death is your best
friend death is you know absolutely
nothing to be afraid of I can't tell you
how much I look forward to
do you know that's the last thing I want
to be I want to avoid and so I have an I
have an agreement with
Jesus don't you come for me I'm gone I'm
not fighting this this is you know don't
come for me until you're ready you know
for us to wrap this thing up because
death is your good
friend thanks very much
for so Chris I know that there will be a
group here who will always love you to
come back and um if everybody knows that
Chris is our guest speaker in the
morning at 11: a.m. service and also we
have a surprise guest musician singer
from Agape International choir and the
center in Santa Monica so she she just
happens to be passing through and has
family in Georgetown so she's coming to
us tomorrow we have the Divine
Duo thank you
everybody
don't bye
bye
yeah take a walk on the
beach s sit too
long there we have
it
first